Student Guide 2022

Aikido World Alliance®
GenAikido.com

AikidoWorldAlliance.com

DEDICATION
This guideis dedicated to the Founder of Aikido,
Morihei Ueshiba O-Sensei (1883-1969)

Aikido Kaiso Morihei Ueshiba O-Sensei (1883-1969)

INTRODUCTION
This Student Guide is designed to give both beginning and advanced students a
deeper understanding of our Aikido training. Students come to Aikido for many
different reasons, and each of you must be able to clearly state what Aikido is for
you. While the guide cannot give you that sort of personal understanding, it will
serve as a basic introduction to the history, principles and frame work of our
training. Merely reading this guide will not give an understanding of Aikido;
only sincere training will do this. Without training there is no Aikido, and without
training this guide is only empty words.

2
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Emphasis in the guide is not on technical explanation. It does, however, explain
clearly the types of training that an Association student undertakes, and the
reasons for them. Etiquette is also explained; the dojo is often a perplexing
place for the new student, and we believe this will make the sometimes,
confusing ritual of the dojo easier for the beginner. Finally, it is our sincere hope
that the Aikido student will find in this guides source of knowledge,
encouragement and inspiration that will allow him or her to enter more deeply
into Aikido training.

Welcome
Welcome to the study of Aikido. As an Aikidoka, an Aikido trainee, you have
entered into a training that can offer many benefits for you and your life: selfdefense skills, physical fitness, improved health of mind and body, confidence,
and more. We would like to stress to you from the beginning that Aikido will be
for you what you make it. Do not enter Aikido training with the attitude that you
are to be “given” knowledge simply by showing up for practice or paying your
dues. You must take knowledge. Learn actively. Watch, listen, and “steal” from
your teacher and your senior students everything that you can. Be intense and
hungry.
As a beginner, a great deal of knowledge will be thrown at you very rapidly in
the coming months. We encourage you to cultivate what is called “beginner’s
mind”: an attitude of openness, attentiveness and sincerity. This will make your
initial months of training the most beneficial. This is the time, after all, to lay the
foundations of your training. Advanced students, also, should not forget this
attitude. Every day is a new day, and a new opportunity to learn.
What is Aikido?
The Japanese martial art of Aikido is a
comprehensive system of throwing, joint-locking,
striking and pinning techniques, coupled with training
in traditional Japanese weapons such as the sword,
staff and knife. Founded by Morihei Ueshiba early in
the twentieth century following his own extensive
study of various armed and unarmed martial systems,
Aikido represents a potent distillation of centuries of
Japanese knowledge. It is one of the most widely
practiced Budo, martial ways, in the world. However,
Ueshiba (commonly called O-Sensei, or “venerable
3
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

teacher”) was determined that his Aikido be
practiced as more than simply methods of fighting.
The Japanese martial arts, influenced by the internal
and meditative disciplines inherited from India and
China, have often carried with them an emphasis on
the development of internal as well as physical
integrity. Wielding the life-taking sword with
compassion and insight, the ideal warrior
uprightness, courage and loyalty, gladly sacrificing
life (but never honor) in the name of principle and
duty. Steeped in these traditions, O-Sensei
conceived of Aikido as not only a means of
vanquishing a foe, but as a means of promoting the
positive character of the ideal warrior and ultimately
of transcending dualistic conflict. For O-Sensei,
Aikido was a path of self-development. He believed
that it could be a means for anyone, of any nation, to
follow the same path. Aikido is shugyo: an intense
physical and spiritual training to perfect human
character and develop true wisdom.
More than any technique, it is this spirit of shugyo which defines true Aikido
training.
While technical mastery is essential, without these philosophical
principles Aikido would be nothing more than exercises and throws. As you
train, keep these concepts in your mind. Eventually they must fall away as
concepts and become a part of you.
As a beginner, strive to practice the principles of Aikido – intense energy,
relaxation, mental focus and calm – in everything you do. You will find that
Aikido training is not confined to the dojo but becomes the very act of living.
This is what is meant by “Aikido in daily life”.

4
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

LINEAGE
Shihan Fumio Toyoda
Shihan Toyoda was the Founder and Chief Instructor of the Aikido Association of
America. “Shihan” is translated to mean “teacher of teachers”. This reflects
Shihan Toyoda’s responsibility not only to teach Aikido, but to instruct his
students to be competent teachers themselves. Born in Japan on November 8,
1947, Shihan Toyoda began his study of Aikido at the age of 10 at Chushinkan
Dojo in Tochigi Prefecture, Japan. After earning his shodan at the age of 17, he
was accepted as uchideshi (resident apprentice or “live in” student) at the
Ichikukai Dojo in Tokyo, committing to three years of rigorous training in misogi
and zen. During this time, he also pursued a law degree at Senshu University.
After graduating from Senshu University, Shihan Toyoda lived as uchideshi at
Aikido World Headquarters (Aikikai Hombu Dojo), and there began his career as
a professional, full-time instructor. During this period, he also taught at several
leading Japanese Universities, among them Daito Bunka University, Seikei
University, and International Christian University. Beginning in 1971, Toyoda
Shihan taught for two years at the Ki no Kenkyukai (Ki Society) as a Chief
Instructor of the Shin Shin Toitsu Aikido of Koichi Tohei.
His teaching
responsibilities took him to South Korea and Hawaii, where he presented Aikido
demonstrations and seminars to instructors and beginners alike. During these
early years and traveling and teaching abroad, Toyoda Shihan recognized the
growing need for more full time, qualified Aikido instruction, and made a
personal commitment to spread the art and philosophy of Aikido beyond the
shores of his native Japan. Beginning in 1974, Toyoda Shihan began to fulfill
this commitment by personally spreading the teachings of Aikido throughout
North America. That year, he established the Chicago Ki-Aikido Society and
began an intensive schedule of travel and seminar instruction. As Toyoda Shihan
organized and taught in the United States, he became acutely aware of the
deep political divisions existing within the Aikido world. He also noticed the
rigid organizational control that Japan-based Aikido organizations exerted on
international dojo. He observed dissatisfied dojo, one by one, sever their ties
with Japan to pursue an independent and unsure future. Toyoda Shihan was
convinced that this status was not conducive to the growth of Aikido and could
only lessen the quality of Aikido outside of Japan. In 1984, Toyoda Shihan set
about the formidable task of organizing and establishing the Aikido Association
of America as an independent organization.

5
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

AWA – The Aikido World Alliance
Shihan Andrew Sato
Chief Instructor – Andrew M. Sato, Nanadan Aikikai shihan, is a full time Aikido
instructor and the former Chief Instructor for the Aikido Association of America
& Aikido Association International and Tenshinkan dojo, headquarter dojo for
the AAA. Andrew Sato began his Aikido training in 1977 under Toyoda Shihan,
first as a member of the Ki Aikido Society, then as member of the AAA & AAI.
During his tenure as Chief Instructor for the AAA & AAI he traveled extensively
throughout Europe and the USA passing on the methodology teachings of
Toyoda Shihan’s Aikido.
In 2005, his relationship with the AAA/AAI was
terminated. To further develop his own understanding of Aikido and to support
others who have asked him to continue teaching, Sato Sensei & a group of
dedicated dojo have organized to start the AWA.
Your Place in the AWA
As an AWA member, you are part of an international community of Aikido
practitioners. You are also considered a student of Sato Sensei, as well as a
student of your own sensei. We encourage you to attend seminars and other
opportunities to receive instruction directly from Sato Sensei and other
instructors. This will serve to broaden your training and make you a more
integral part of our community. You are the AWA; without sincere Aikido
students like yourself, we have no reason to exist. Finally, please remember that
as an Aikido student your actions reflect directly on your dojo, your Sensei, Sato
Sensei, the AWA, and the art of Aikido as a whole. Take pride in your art and
your organization and strive to uphold the high moral and ethical standards of
the martial arts at all times.
Sensei – Your Teacher
Gary Wagener is your sensei, ranked Yondan (4th degree black belt) Aikikai,
recognized by Hombu dojo in Japan. Your sensei, your teacher, is someone with
whom you have entered into a relationship of mutual trust. You trust your sensei
to teach you the art of Aikido to the best of her ability. In turn, your sensei trusts
you to practice safely and diligently, to learn whole ‘heartedly, and to conduct
yourself in a manner that reflects favorable on Aikido. “Sensei” literally means
“one who is born before”. This does not refer to age; your sensei may in fact be
younger than you. “Born before” means that your sensei entered the path of
6
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Aikido training before you and has already passed where you are going. Your
sensei is a guide. You do not owe blind allegiance to him, but you do owe
respect, patience and commitment. Your sensei is someone with her own body,
possibly at the risk of life and limb, has learned this art and committed to
sharing it with others. Your sensei is your connection to the lineage of teachers
stretching back to O-Sensei and beyond. Treasure that connection as the
valuable thing it is.
When your sensei talks, listen completely, watch intently. Not everything in
Aikido training will be explained verbally to you; it is an unskilled teacher who
feels the need to explain every detail of the instruction with words alone. Be
patient, and train diligently. As your training progresses, you will gain the
satisfaction of discovering for yourself aspects of our art. Once gained, that
knowledge is yours. The transmission of knowledge is isshin den shin, from
mind to mind.

Etiquette Toward the Sensei
Etiquette is not simply a dead tradition or custom: it is a living method of
training in itself. Observe it mindfully. Following are rules of etiquette to be
observed toward your instructor:
1. Address your instructor as “Sensei” at all times.
2. Bow to your instructor in greeting and when leaving or ending a
conversation. When your instructor calls your name, answer “Yes” or
“Hai” quickly and attentively.
3. When your instructor talks, listen and look at him or her directly. When
you speak to your instructor speak directly and plainly.
4. When walking with your instructor, offer to help carry bags or other things
he or she may be carrying. Japanese tradition calls for the student to
walk slightly behind and to the left of the instructor (this back left corner
was the hardest place for a swordsman to defend quickly if attacked, and
so the student would walk here to protect his teacher). While your
instructor may not require you to observe this old custom, it is an
excellent way to develop your awareness of proper ma-ai (distance), and
to show respect. In any case, be alert at all times when in the company of
your instructor. It is your responsibility to help and protect in any way
possible.
5. Observe common rules of politeness and consideration towards your
sensei, as you would toward any respected person.
7
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

The Dojo – A place of training
The word “dojo” can be translated as “place of the Way” or “place of
enlightenment”.
It is from the above that something more than a mere
gymnasium or training hall is denoted by the word “dojo”.
The Japanese martial arts dojo as we know it developed around the time that
the Bushi (warrior class) first came into contact with Zen instructors and practice.
The Bushi found in Zen Buddhism a philosophy suited to their lifestyle. The
training useful for developing the discipline of mind and body that warriors have
always valued. Zen teachers also used martial analogies and references in their
teachings for the pragmatic-minded Bushi. The soldier and the monk required
the same qualities: fearlessness, lack of attachment to externals and to self,
energetic striving, and the commitment to follow a course of action to its end.
Both sought a state of mind free of all restraints, flowing without hindrance; both
submitted themselves to severe training. As Zen became more widely accepted
and finally patronized by the ruling authorities, its influence on the martial arts
grew. In time, the martial arts came to be seen not only as fighting methods,
but as methods to cultivate “self”.
This tradition is reflected in the tenets of Japanese Budo (the martial ways).
Aikido is Budo, and as such it has inherited this tradition. All of us as Aikido
trainees strive to not only learn the techniques of self-defense, but also to forge
ourselves into better persons. Even without a strong emphasis on Zen, the
modern dojo is universally recognized as a place for the perfection of human
character through the strict discipline of mind-body training. For this we are
indebted to the Bushi and to the teachings of Zen.
A favorite saying of O-Sensei’s was “Masakatsu agatsu” – true victory is selfvictory. The dojo is the special place where we train for this victory over self.

8
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Inside the Dojo
A typical dojo will have several features you should be aware of. In particular,
certain areas of the dojo have meanings that you should know. The following
placement of designated areas and definitions will be helpful:

1.

Kamiza: Literally “god-seat”, the kamiza is the “front” of the dojo, and
the direction towards which you will sit and bow at the beginning and end
of class. The kamiza in an Aikido dojo will usually have a hanging
calligraphic scroll and a photograph of Ueshiba O’Sensei. It may also
have a small shrine or kamidana (“god-shelf”) in the Shinto tradition, floral
arrangements, or other objects depending on the orientation of the dojo.
The kamiza may also be called the “shomen” – the head or center.
2. Shimoza: The shimoza is the “low” wall, opposite the kamiza
3. Joseki: The joseki is the “high” seat, the righthand side of the dojo as
you face the kamiza. When students are lined up formally, they will sit in
order of rank or seniority, with higher-ranked students on the Joseki side.
4. Shimoseki: The “low” seat, the shimoseki is the left and side of the dojo
as you face the kamiza. Lower ranked students and beginners will be
seated on this side.
5. Tatami: Tatami technically are woven straw mats, the traditional floor
coverings in Japanese dojo as well as homes. Modern dojo use, some
form of foam mats, which are easier to maintain and last longer.
Other things you will find in your dojo, of course, are office space, changing
rooms and lavatories. Take the time to familiarize yourself with your dojo and is
features.

Dojo Responsibilities
As a member of your dojo, you enjoy certain privileges. You also bear certain
responsibilities in common with your fellow students:
Dues: It is wrong to think of the dojo as some sort of health club where you pay
for your instruction and expect to get as much as you can. You do not pay for
your instruction at a dojo: the teachings you will receive, which your sensei has
learned with great effort and exertion over many years, are beyond any price.
Your dojo fees simply insure, that the facility itself can continue to exist viably.
Pay your dues on time, without being asked. Do not put your instructor in the
uncomfortable position of having to ask you for money. You do not hesitate to
9
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

pay a doctor or other professional who provides services to you: treat your
sensei with the same consideration. Late or negligent payment is a sign of
disrespect not only to your teacher, but to the dojo and your fellow students.
Cleaning: As a member of the dojo, you will be called upon to assist in the
cleaning and maintenance of the facility. This is not an attempt by your
instructor to take advantage of your labor. It is on one hand a purely practical
need, and on the other hand it is as much a part of your training as practicing
actual Aikido technique. Get involved with the dojo. Put your hands and hard
work into every inch of it – then you will truly feel a part of it. It is very nice to
talk about high concepts like “victory over the self”, but if the toilets are always
dirty then our words are empty.
Etiquette in the Dojo
1.
Respect the dojo, its instructors, and your fellow students: they make
your training possible.
2.
When entering the dojo, remove your shoes and leave them neatly on
the shoe rack.
3.
If a class is in session, move and talk quietly so as not to disturb it.
4.
Bow when entering and leaving the training area.
5.
Volunteer your services to keep the dojo clean. If you see something
that needs cleaning, simply do it. If you cannot, tell someone who
can.
6.
Do not eat, drink or chew gum within the dojo.
7.
Do not wait to be asked to pay your dues on time.
8.
Always remain aware of fire safety and security. Be conscious of who
enters and leaves the dojo, and for what purpose.
9.
Strive to maintain a serious yet cordial atmosphere in the dojo.

Aikidoka – Students of the Way
As an Aikido student, you are extremely fortunate. Of all the persons in this
world, you are one of the few to whom the qualities necessary to training – a
healthy body and mind, financial resources, the time and opportunity, an
instructor and facility - have come. We should reflect on how rare it is in this
world for human beings to be able to undertake such a training of selfdevelopment, and we should express our gratitude through single-minded and
intense training.
Your fellow students are your companions in training. Without them, you could
not train. You will spend a great deal of time getting to know their bodies in
10
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

practice. Take time to also know their personalities. Take an interest in your
fellow students and work together with them to understand and develop Aikido.
The Dojo Hierarchy
As an Aikido student, you occupy a certain place in the dojo hierarchy. At the
top of this structure, of course, is your sensei. Beneath him or her are students
of various levels. Those students that are your seniors are your sempai. Those
beneath you are your kohai. The sempai-kohai system is pervasive in Japanese
culture. Its intention is not to establish some sort of superiority; rather, an
awareness of place allows each student to fulfill the roles expected of him or her.
Treat your sempai with respect and support their efforts to help your sensei.
Learn from them, for they also have been where you are headed. Each of them
has learned from your sensei according to individual capability, and each may
have unique knowledge or variations that others have missed.
Treat your kohai with encouragement and support. They are under your care.
They depend on you to learn, and they look up to you, often blindly. Be careful
to be worthy of the respect they give you and do everything in your power to
help them in their training. Above all, do not be overbearing, and be wary of
their praise: remember your place and cultivate humility.
Practicing with Others
The practice of Aikido necessarily involves others.
While there are many
exercises and practice methods that you may perform by yourself, the core of
your training will involve practice in the defense against actual attacks from other
students.
It must never be forgotten that the techniques of Aikido can be extremely
injurious or lethal if applied incorrectly in practice. It is your responsibility to
practice safely. This means never practicing a technique you have not been
directly taught by your instructor. It also means practicing new techniques
slowly, in a cooperative manner with your partner. Be aware that different
people have different body types, styles of movement, and capabilities.
Applying a joint technique to a small person in the same manner as to a large
one is incorrect and will needlessly injure. Develop your sensitivity to others and
give them only the amount of force and power that they are able to take safely
at their level. You will be grateful for the same treatment. In this manner, both
of you will safely grow in power and skill.
11
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Etiquette Toward Other Students
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Treat others as you wish to be treated.
Be the first to offer to assist your fellow students in any way during
training.
Consider it an honor to train with your fellow students and to take
ukemi for them.
Take it upon yourself to know each student, and to offer
encouragement when needed.
Help beginners to become familiar with the dojo.
Practice always with sensitivity toward your partner’s capabilities and
limitations, as well as your own.

The Training – Daily Practice as Path
The practice of Aikido is nothing special, and nothing mysterious. The “Way” of
Aikido is nothing more than dedicated daily practice. Do not think that anything
else will give you knowledge of Aikido.
Train day to day, patiently and
consistently, and you will see a natural result.
Attitude of Training
It has been said that O-Sensei exhorted his students to “train joyfully”. This is
excellent advice. At all times you should extend a very positive and bright
attitude in training. At the same time, however, you must maintain a core of
deadly seriousness. Aikido is Budo – a martial way. As such it deals with
extremes of violence and with the forging of better human beings. Aikido is not
a way to magically avoid conflict through some mysterious process of
“harmony”. The spirit of Aikido is to face conflict squarely. Only then can we
hope to transcend it.
When you train, remember always the potential for injury that lies within your
movements. Be conscious of your openings and gaps in your awareness, and
those of your partner. Walk and move with purpose, ready at any time to
respond to whatever arises in your daily life and on the mats. Understand
deeply that in this life we may die at any moment, and train with this awareness.
In Japan there is an expression: shinken shobu. Shinken shobu literally means a
fight with live steel swords. It implies a true, serious situation. Your attitude in
training must be “shinken shobu”. When your partner attacks you with a
wooden knife in practice, you must believe it is a real knife. When you attack
12
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

your partner in practice, attack truly. In this manner, you both will receive real
benefit from the training.
Posture and Stance – Sitting and standing
As you train, you will notice the relaxed, upright shisei (posture) and kamae
(stance) of your seniors. Strive to cultivate awareness of your own posture and
that of those around you. The following are four ways of standing and sitting
which you will use most often in Aikido training:
1.

Seiza: Seiza is the familiar Japanese manner of sitting with the legs
folded under and the buttocks resting on the heels. The seiza position
lends itself to the proper alignment of the spine and the development
of proper breathing. It is in some sense the foundation of technique.
When you sit seiza, be sure to extend through the top of your head;
the result of this is that your chin should naturally move in, rather than
jut forward over your chest. Spread your vision out and be aware of
your surroundings. Be careful also not to slouch, or to overarch the
back. You may wish to roll the pelvis slightly forward to achieve this.
Your sensei can correct your posture and give you further advice. It is
common for beginners to feel discomfort in this position; be patient
and sit seiza a few minutes each day. You will rapidly become used to
it and may even come to prefer it to a chair.

2.

Agura no Shisei: Sitting cross-legged. Rather than tucking one foot
under the other, the so-called “tailor” position, agura is a position with
the right-foot lying on the floor in front of the left. Those with little
flexibility may find it difficult to bring the knees down to the ground,
or to keep the back straight. Again, daily stretching and practice will
help.

3.

Shizentai: Usually translated as “natural stance”, shizentai is simply
standing with feet shoulder width. Settle yourself in your abdomen
with proper breathing and allow all tension to leave your upper body.
Maintain a dynamic tension in your legs, ready to move at any instant.
Again, align your spine and extend upwards through your head.
Spread out your vision; do not hang your head downward.

4.

Hanmi no Kamae: Hanmi is the “half-body” stance used in defense.
Be sure that your front and rear feet are aligned properly as your
sensei directs, and that your forward knee is slightly bent. Set your
13
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

hips forward, and fiercely extend your awareness and determination in
all directions.
Remember always that your posture reflects your state of mind. A slouched
posture indicates a scattered, dull or fatigued mind; a tense posture indicates
nervousness or hyperactivity. You will find that the cultivation of correct posture
will actually change the state of your mind as well. Again, consult with your
sensei for actual instruction on correct posture and its ramifications for
technique.

Elements of Training
The following are some elements of practice that you will encounter in your
dojo. Your sensei will impart instruction in the actual technical details of these
elements.
Warm-ups and Stretching: For maximum benefit, warm-up individually before
the beginning of class, and stretch again afterwards to develop flexibility.
Warm-up exercises are to be done dynamically but relaxed, breathing deeply. A
longer period of warming up may be required in cold or damp weather.
Ukemi: Ukemi (literally “catch your body”) is the art of safely receiving the force
of techniques applied to you; this includes various rolling and falling techniques.
Ukemi is often neglected by beginners, who find it difficult and who prefer to
practice the techniques of self-defense. It must be remembered that without
good ukemi skills, Aikido dies. Without the ability to safely practice which ukemi
gives us, we cannot train. Ukemi is self-defense; it is the ability to survive any
technique. Devote your energy to mastering good ukemi. It is invariably found
that the student who is a skilled uke (person receiving the technique and falling)
also has the skill to become a skilled nage (thrower) by feeling the dynamics of
a technique applied to you, you will learn to apply that technique to others more
effectively. Ukemi training will include the following:
Koho Tento Undo
Simple rolling exercise, to sitting, kneeling and
standing
Ushiro Ukemi/breakfall
Falling backward and slapping the mat.
Mae Ukemi/breakfall Falling forward and slapping the mat
Yoko Ukemi
Side fall
Mae Ukemi/rolling
Simple forward roll
Ushiro Ukemi/rolling Simple backwards roll
14
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Mae Ukemi/side fall
position.

Rolling or flipping forward to land in the side fall

Variations on the above will include specific ukemi exercises and applications for
specific techniques.
Wrist-stretching Exercises: These exercises are customarily practiced at the
beginning of class. Learn them well, for they are more than simple stretches.
The manner in which you hold and apply pressure to your own wrists is the same
way in which you will apply pressure to others in response to an attack. Also, the
various wrist movements have an application to tesabaki – hand techniques –
used in defense. Practice these exercises constantly, and you will develop
strong, supple joints.
Aikitaiso: These “Aiki exercises” are designed to teach proper body alignment
and use. Their usefulness, if practiced correctly, cannot be overestimated.
Aikitaiso should be practiced dynamically and crisply.
You should be able to recognize the application of these movements in various
techniques. Aikitaiso exercises will include:
Funakogi undo
Shomenuchi Ikkyo undo
Zengo undo
Happo undo
Tekubikosa undo
Sayu undo
Sayu Choyaku undo
translations

Udefuri undo
Udefuri Choyaku undo
Ushirotori undo
Ushiro Tekubitori (zenshin and kotai – forward and
backward)
Tenkan undo (direct entry, also with step)
*see attached test requirements for English

Tai Sabaki Ho: These body movement exercises are at the foundation of your
technical training. Practiced correctly, they will give you the ability to move
freely and naturally in any direction when attacked. Techniques cannot be
applied if taisabaki is insufficient or timed incorrectly. When practicing taisabaki,
maintain your complete concentration on your opponent at all times, during and
in between movements. Allow no gaps in your awareness or openings in your
posture. Move immediately to control your opponent’s centerline, matching his
or her timing. Tai Sabaki Ho will include both Tai Sabaki Toshu, or emptyhanded exercises, and Tai Sabaki with Bokken, or sword exercises.

15
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

You should immediately see the relation between these two when practicing.
You will learn the following forms of Tai Sabaki:
Tai Sabaki Toshu:
Against munetsuki:
Against shomenuchi:
Against yokomenuchi:

Four distinct movements with atemi
Four distinct movements with atemi
Three distinct movements with atemi.

Tai Sabaki with Bokken:
Against munetski:
Against shomenuchi:
Against yokomenuchi:

Four distinct movements with cuts.
Four distinct movements with cuts.
Three distinct movements with cuts.

Waza: Waza are formal Aikido techniques. It must be remembered that all waza
are pre-arranged forms; they are the vehicles through which Aikido is
transmitted from teacher to student. It is up to the student, however, to give life
to these forms, and ultimately to transcend them. They are not rigid and
dogmatic – they are guidelines that will bring the student after extensive training
to his or her own Aikido. No two students are exactly alike, and so everyone will
naturally develop an aikido that suits them. O-Sensei is reported to have said,
“Aikido has no techniques”. One meaning of this is that the student must not
destroy Aikido by limiting it to this or that form; rather, the student should seek
always to grasp the internal principles of Aikido, and to manifest them moment
to moment.
Through form, grasp the ultimate principle beyond form or
formlessness: this can be said to be the goal of the martial artist.

Your study of Aikido waza will include:
Kihon-waza:
Fundamental or basic techniques
Oyo-waza:
Applied or advanced techniques
Nage-waza
Throwing techniques
Katame-waza
Pinning techniques
Kansetsu-waza
Joint locking techniques
Atemi-waza
Techniques of striking vulnerable points.
Ushiro-waza:
Defense against attacks from the rear.
Kaeshi-waza:
Methods of countering an opponent’s technique.
Henka-waza:
Methods of freely switching from one technique to
another, different technique.
Renzoku-waza:
Methods of switching from a technique to another
variation of the same technique.
Buki-waza:
Weapons techniques (dealt with separately below)
16
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Which can be further classified according to circumstance as:
Tachi-waza:
Standing technique
Suwari-waza:
Seated technique
Hanmi-hantachi-waza:
Seated technique, defending against standing
attackers
Jiyu-waza:
Freestyle technique.

The following are major Aikido techniques you will learn, with approximate
English translations:
Ikkyo:
Nikyo:

First Teaching
Second Teaching

Koshinage:
Kaiten nage:

Hip throw
Rotary throw

Sankyo:

Third Teaching

Jiujinage:

Crossed elbows
(literally, "# 10" throw,
since the Japanese
character for 10 is the
shape of a cross).

Yonkyo:
Gokyo:
Iriminage:

Fourth Teaching
Fifth Teaching
Entering throw

Kubinage:
Udegarami:
Sudori:

Neck throw
Entwining arm
Disappearing

Shihonage:

Four-direction throw
Sumi otoshi:
Timing throw (literally
Aiki otoshi:
"breath throw”)

Corner drop

Wrist turning

Boulder drop

Kokyunage:
Kotegaeshi:

Ganseki otoshi:

Aiki drop

Ikkyo, Nikyo, Sankyo, Yonkyo, Gokyo, Kotegaeshi, Shihonage and others also
have specific pinning techniques associated with them. Most techniques have
pinning or throwing variations.

Note: Omote / Ura – Irimi/Tenkan
Many, but not all, Aikido techniques have variations that you will be required to
know. The words Omote, Ura, Irimi, and Tenkan are used to designate these
variations. Omote means "front", and Ura means "back"; thus, these two terms
are primarily spatial designations. Irimi means "to enter", and Tenkan means
"spinning change" or "to turn"; thus, these two terms designate body
movement. While these two pairs of terms are sometimes nearly
17
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

interchangeable, AWA usage is to refer to pinning technique (katame-waza) as
omote and ura, and throwing techniques (nage-waza) as irimi and tenkan.
Note: A Word on Aikido Technique Nomenclature
The full names of applied Aikido techniques, as you can see on your Minimum
Promotion Test Requirements sheet, are composed of two parts. The first half of
the name will generally indicate the attack, for example katatekosadori, crosshand grab. The second half of the name will be the actual technique of defense
used against this attack, for example kotegaeshi. The full name of the applied
technique would thus be Katatekosadori Kotegaeshi: Cross-hand grab wris
turning technique, which in this case happens to be a throw followed by a pin.
Certain techniques will also have added to their name certain specifications,
such as omote and ura, or indications of the context of their application, such as
suwari-waza. While beginners will find this Japanese terminology confusing at
first, it generally takes little time to become accustomed to it.
Aikido nomenclature is an attempt to apply terminology to something that
cannot always be compartmentalized and labeled. O-Sensei himself never
formally established one proper way of naming our techniques. Various teachers
may therefore have their own versions of nomenclature. It must be stressed that
a thorough familiarity with technique and its principles is our goal, and that
names are simply a convenient and not always precise way of describing what
we do.
Kogeki: Closely related to atemi, methods of striking in the performance of
technique, are kogeki: methods of attacking. When you train with your partners
you must have the ability and the skill to attack fully - otherwise, your partner will
never gain the ability to defend against true attacks. Training methods of kogeki
will involve the practice of strikes and kicks, as well as methods of grabbing and
choking from the front and rear. Following is a list of the most commonly
practiced attacks. Please note that these attacks may refer to both empty-hand
and weapons applications, and that combination attacks are also practiced.
Some attacks also have gyaku, or reverse, variations. Again, these are only
guidelines; no list can show all possible attacks. The student must eventually be
prepared for any attack, from any direction.

18

t­

Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Strikes
Munetsuki:
Ganmenuchi:
Shomenuchi:
Yokomenuchi:
M a e g e r i :
Yo k o g e r i :
Mawashigeri:

Punch or thrust to the torso.
Punch or thrust to the face.
Downward strike to the head.
Hooking strike to the side of the head (temple).
Front kick.
Side kick.
"Roundhouse" kick.

Grabbing/choking
Katatetori:
Katatekosatori:
Katateryotetori:
Ryotetori:
Katatori:
Ryokatatori:
Munedori:
Ryomunedori:
Kubishime:
Ushiro tekubitori:
Ushiro hijitori:
Ushiro katatori:
Ushiro eridori:
Ushiro kubishime:
Ushiro tekubitori kubishime:
Ushirotori:

Same-side wrist grab.
Cross-hand wrist grab.
Both hands grasping one forearm.
Both hands grasping both wrists.
Grabbing the shoulder.
Both hands grasping both shoulders.
Grabbing the lapel.*
Both hands grasping both lapels.*
Choking the neck.
Both wrists grabbed from behind.
Both elbows grabbed from behind.
Both shoulders grabbed from behind.
Collar grabbed from behind.
Choking the neck from behind.
Choking the neck and grabbing one wrist from
behind.
"Bearhug" from behind; also refers to rear
grabbing attacks in general.

* The terms "Munedori" and "Katadori", while specifically referring to
different attacks, are often used interchangeably.
Randori: Randori literally means "to seize chaos". This is the practice of defense
against multiple attackers for which Aikido is famous. Randori is the ultimate test
of your understanding of Aikido principle, and especially of your Tai Sabaki. The
19
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

strategies for randori will be imparted to you by your instructor. It must be
stressed here that randori must be practiced safely: both uke and nage must
"hold back" slightly to prevent injury. This means that nage will throw or move in
such a way that the uke will be able to jump up to return and attack
continuously. It also means that nage will tire from this "endless" supply of
attackers and must eventually fail: the uke must not take advantage of this to
attack and injure nage carelessly. Both uke and nage must appreciate the
kindness they are showing to one another and take full advantage of this
excellent training opportunity.
Buki-waza: Buki-waza is weapons technique, in this case using three traditional
weapons: the jo, or 4-foot staff, the ken, or sword, and the tanto, or knife. The
skills learned through weapons practice - timing and distance, dynamic
movement, kime or focus, intensity and energy extension, etc. - are invaluable to
empty -hand technique. As you train you will see the close relationship between
weapons and empty-hand training. Do not neglect weapons practice because it
seems difficult or outdated. Its benefits are beyond measure, and it is part of our
Aikido tradition. Weapons training must always stress safety; a wooden training
weapon can injure or kill as easily as a live blade. Always treat training weapons
as if they were real and take pains to observe proper etiquette of handling and
use. This will also help you to develop, an attitude of seriousness and purpose in
your training. Weapons training will include:
Jo
Stances and methods of holding
Suburi:
Kata:
Kumijo:
Jo against Bokken:
Jo dori:
Jo nage:

-Solo striking practice
Prearranged forms
Paired forms, jo against jo
Paired forms
Unarmed defense against jo attacks
Throwing with the jo

Ken (usually using Bokken, wooden training sword)
Stances and methods of holding
Suburi:
Tanren uchi:
Kata:
Kumitachi:
Bokken against Jo:
Bokken dori:

Solo striking practice.
Solo striking practice against a target.
Prearranged forms.
Paired forms, bokken against bokken.
Paired forms
Unarmed defense against the sword.
20

Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Tanto
Methods of holding
Suburi:
Tanto dori:

-Solo striking practice.
Unarmed defense against the knife.

Internal Training: "Internal training" refers to the practice of Ki Tests, breathing
exercises (kokyu-ho) and meditation (meiso-ho), as well as the practice called
kokyu-dosa. These training methods are meant to cultivate the psycho-physical
attributes necessary for the practice of Aikido as a budo, a martial way. Although
listed last here, the practice of these internal training methods is of the utmost
importance in Aikido training.
Ki Tests are methods of testing your postural and mental stability, degree of
tension and relaxation, and understanding of basic Aikido technical principles.
These tests may be given at any time; during a promotion test, they are
generally administered during the performance of Aikitaiso exercises and the
demonstration of basic Aikido postures; you will find these listed in the Minimum
Promotion Test Requirements under the heading "Ki Tests and Exercises".
Kokyu-ho includes the following:
Okinaga: The breathing practice which involves deep, prolonged
exhalations from the hara (abdomen) through the mouth, and
controlled inhalations through the nose.
Kiai: The practice which involves explosive exhalations from the hara
with vocalization, usually using the syllables "Ei!" and "Toh!".
Ibuki: The practice which involves explosive exhalations from the hara
without vocalization.
Meiso-ho is a practice of meditation through which the student develops kiai
(energy) and joriki, the power of focused concentration, through the cultivation
of samadhi, a state of relaxed concentration transcending subject/object
dualism. This method may initially involve the counting of breaths, or
mindfulness techniques for developing a deeper awareness of mental processes.
There are many types of meditation, but in order to have an application to budo,
the method you use must stress wakeful awareness of yourself and your
surroundings, rather than the development of trances or sleep-like states. The
type of meditation stressed by Toyoda Shihan, and described here, is that of the
Zen school, in keeping with his training history.
21
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Kokyu-dosa is an exercise in which you will sit seiza facing your partner and
extend your arms. Your partner will grasp them and attempt to resist your efforts
to unbalance him or her. This exercise calls for the proper use of the hara and
breathing and will also help develop this proper use of the body, breath and
energy. Another variation of this is renzoku kokyu-dosa, which involves
continuous movement.
Injuries and Illness in Training
Should you have any doubt as to your ability to train due to any physical
condition, consult with your physician and with your sensei before practicing. Do
not train when ill. Should you become sick, notify your sensei of your illness.
Aikido students often will train before an injury is fully healed because they are
eager to return to the dojo. While this spirit is commendable, it is actually
detrimental to the training. Your body is your tool in Aikido training; if you abuse
the tool, the training cannot continue. Be sure to train hard and often, but also
learn your limitations and allow your body to adapt and recover.
Should you find yourself absent from the dojo due to illness or injury, ask your
sensei what you can do to continue your training while gone. The stretching and
wrist-stretching exercises, Aikitaiso, internal training methods, kogeki, weapons
training and other subjects may still be suitable for you depending on your
condition. If not, treat your injury or illness itself as training; with the spirit of
shugyo, every act or situation in our lives can become practice.
Etiquette in Training
The following are rules of etiquette to be observed when practicing:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Remove all jewelry before practice; it can be hazardous to yourself and
others.
Keep your toe- and fingernails trimmed properly.
Observe strict rules of personal hygiene; keep your gi (uniform) clean at all
times.
If you are early for training, use that time to clean the dojo and to practice.
Five minutes before the scheduled start of class, line up and sit quietly
practicing internal training.
When your sempai calls out "Shomen ni rei!" (bow to the front), bow. When
your sempai calls out "Sensei ni rei!" (bow to the teacher), bow and say
"Onegaishimasu!" (please be so kind [as to teach]).
22
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•

•
•
•

If you are late to class, change quickly, bow upon entering the practice area,
and then sit quietly off to the side until your sensei] gives you permission to
join class.
B o w to your sensei when called upon to assist in demonstrating a
technique; bow again and sit down when done.
B o w when the instructor has finished demonstrating and directs the class to
practice.
When your sensei claps at any time during training, sit down in straight lines.
Should your sensei advise you on a technique during practice, thank him or
her and bow.
Do not talk when your sensei is instructing or lecturing.
If you need to leave the training area during class for any reason, bow
and thank your partner, and then ask your instructor's permission to be
excused.
Bow to your partner when beginning or ending practice with that person.
At the end of class, your sempai will again call out "Shomen ni rei!" and
" S en se i n i rei !". A s y ou b ow t o y o ur sensei, say "Ar igat o
gozaimashita" (thank you very much). Your sempai will then call out
"Hotagai ni rei!" (bow to your fellow students). At this point, you should
bow to everyone with whom you practiced during that class.
When practicing, tap loudly with your hand should you feel excessive
pain; this is a signal for your partner to stop, and is faster than saying
"ouch" or "stop".
Never practice any technique you have not been taught. Observe rules
of safety at all times.
Report any injuries to your sensei immediately.
Do not teach Aikido techniques to non-students without permission. This
is to prevent misuse and injury.

VII. RANK AND PROMOTION TESTING - Progress in Training
Rank in Aikido is awarded to indicate your progress in the art. This is a very
subjective matter; progress for one student may denote something entirely
different from what progress is to another student. In order to insure, that a
high standard is maintained throughout the AWA, we have established its
Minimum Promotion Test Requirements as a guideline to the awarding of
rank.
As a student, do not forget that these requirements are a minimum. This
means that simply learning these techniques does not complete your
knowledge of Aikido. Actually, the techniques listed as requirements are far
23
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

from comprehensive. What they are is a collection of techniques that require
the student to master a wide range of body movements and skills, which can
then be applied to the whole body of Aikido technique. While we
encourage you to use this list of requirements to structure your training, you
must not make it the sole guide of your practice.
Rank is not something for you as a student to focus on too heavily. It is
important, since we need some indication of competence and eventually of
instructional ability. Still, the student that focuses too heavily on simply
learning "the stuff I need to know for my next test" will miss the point of
Aikido training, both technically and internally.
The Promotion Test
A physical promotion test is required by the AWA for all kyu rank awards
and dan ranks up to yondan. This is for several reasons. First, it is to prevent
the abuse of rank. Without testing, the awarding of rank becomes subject to
personal whim and favoritism. The promotion test system requires the
student to display his or her knowledge in front of a test committee of
qualified instructors, who then vote on the test results.
Secondly, the promotion test is a part of training. It is a barrier. The test for
most students is a nerve-wracking affair, since it requires a public
performance. You may feel tense or frightened when you test. The
confidence you have gained in your training, however, should carry you
through. The test is an excellent opportunity to bring the principles of the
martial arts - courage, concentration, relaxation, intensity - to use.
Promotion tests show you your true state and level.
Finally, the public display of the promotion test is necessary for the survival of
Aikido. If we cannot display our technique, we cannot teach, and we cannot
continue to gain respect and appreciation for the martial arts from the general
public. The promotion test is proof that you can show your technique at any
time. It is your statement of your status as an Aikido practitioner, and your
public demonstration of the skill you have gained through your own hard
training.
When you take a promotion test, you should remember that you are a martial
artist. Even if it is your first test and you have only been practicing for a few
months, you will be treated like a martial artist, and should act like one. This
means throwing your whole self into the test, with concentration and dynamic
energy. If you were to approach your test as if it were the last thing you were to
24
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

do in your life, you would have the proper attitude. At all times maintain your
posture and bearing. If you make a mistake, let it go by - do not be disturbed.
Everyone makes mistakes, but it is your reaction to that mistake which will show
the level of your training. Above all, do not give up. When your test is finished,
do not think you are done once you have made your final bow. Stand up and
walk strongly to your seat. Sit down and maintain your posture - you are still
being watched.
Actually, your test is never done - for your whole life. Take this attitude, and you
will be ready any time.
Dan Rank
The test for a dan, or black belt, rank is one of the most difficult yet positive
experiences you will have as an Aikido student. It has become the custom in
some organizations and dojo to award black belt rank without requiring the
student to test. The AWA is strict in its policy requiring black belt candidates to
undergo the testing process. An AWA black belt test is grueling but will give you
the opportunity to display what you have learned through your own hard work.
The black belt has come to be seen, largely through movies and the media, as a
mark of mastery or deadly skill. Actually, the word for a first-degree black belt,
shodan, means "beginner" The black belt is simply a mark of your recognition
as an Aikido student. In other words, you are no longer a guest in the dojo, but
a legitimate practitioner. Be proud of your black belt achievement, but keep in
mind what it truly represents. The Founder said, "Do not be in a hurry. It takes at
least ten years to reach the first rung!" The path to mastery of Aikido, as in any
martial art, is lifelong training.
The Test Committee
The test committee, or shinsa in kai, is the entity that conducts promotion
testing. Consisting of sandan or higher ranked practitioners and headed by a
Teaching Committee member in your area, the purpose of the test committee is
to insure, that your promotion test is conducted properly, in accordance with
AWA policy. When the test committee convenes to administer your test, it is
possible that its members may have widely different views on technical
standards; however, as long as your technique is sound and exhibits a strong
grasp of principle, it need not adhere exactly to any particular committee
member's interpretation. There are many ways of doing Aikido, and AWA
testing policy respects this. In some situations where a committee is not able to
meet, your sensei may conduct your promotion test directly. All dan tests, unless
25
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

arranged otherwise with AWA headquarters, must take place in front of a
committee headed personally by Andy Sato Sensei, who is the ultimate head of
all test committees.
The Technical Committee
As part of the AWA efforts to make quality training available to everyone, the
Teaching Committee has been established. Technical Committee members are
senior students, ranked yondan and above, who have been selected to assist
the AWA instructional efforts. A Teaching Committee member may head the
test committee at your promotion test. Committee members also regularly
offer sanctioned instructional seminars dealing with our Minimum Promotion
Test Requirements and other topics, which you should make every effort to
attend.
Etiquette in Promotion Testing
The following are rules of etiquette to be followed when you take a promotion
test:
1. Be certain that you are familiar with the techniques and exercises for
which you are responsible. Remember that all tests are cumulative.
2. Be certain that you have fulfilled all other requirements for your test,
such as minimum time and training hours required, and seminar
attendance.
3. Be certain that you have filled out all appropriate applications and have
paid your test fee and AWA annual dues. If you are behind in your dojo
dues, settle your account before applying to test.
4. When others are testing, offer to take ukemi for them. Be ready to be
called upon to help in administering the test in any way.
5. When your name is called to test, answer "Hai!" clearly and move to the
proper place. Sit down, bow to shomen, and wait calmly.
6. Follow the directions of the test committee without hesitation.
7. When your uke is called to assist in your test, bow in unison with him or
her to shomen. Bow to your uke and stand up. When your uke is
dismissed, sit seiza and bow, then face shomen and await further
instructions or the next uke.
8. When demonstrating technique, do not hesitate or pause. If you make a
mistake, finish the technique if possible or at least move away and take
a defensive stance.
9. Do not stop or give up. Move cleanly and quickly.
10. If the test committee stops your test to advise you, sit seiza and listen
carefully.
26
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

11. Bow when they are finished.
12. At the conclusion of your test, after you have bowed to your last uke
and then to shomen, turn toward the test committee and bow.
13. Maintain your composure and bearing as you walk to your seat. Do not
bend over or lie down, even if you are very tired. Should you feel ill, you
may leave the mat. Otherwise, sit calmly and regain your breath.

VIII. INSTRUCTOR CERTIFICATION
As part of its commitment to insuring, the transmission of Aikido to the next
generation, the AWA has established an Instructor Certification program.
Teaching methodology is instructed at the AWA Instructors' Seminars and
documented in the Instructors' Manual.
As specified by AWA policy, the following are instructor levels with which you
should be familiar. You also may one day be eligible for such certification.
Please note that instructor certification, while involving certain rank
requirements, is not tied to rank. In other words, one does not receive such
certification automatically upon attaining a certain rank. With the exception of
Shihan, all certifications are awarded at one of the Nintei Kosu seminars. Valid
for a period of two years, at which time they must be renewed by attendance
at further such seminars.
Shihan: Literally "Teacher of Teachers", Shihan is the highest instructor rank in
AWA. The title of Shihan is awarded by the Aikido World Headquarters in
Tokyo. Sato sensei
is currently the only shihan in the AWA.
Shihandai: "Assistant Shihan". These are high-level practitioners, ranked
godan and above, directly appointed by Sato Sensei as his assistants in the
coordination of organizational activities. These are also persons who, it is
intended, may be eligible in the future to receive the title of Shihan.
Shidoin: "Instructor". Shidoin are fully recognized Aikido teachers. To receive
this certification, an instructor must be ranked sandan or above, and have had
responsibility for the management of a dojo for at least three years. Shidoin are
expected to be familiar with all of the AWA technical requirements.
Fukushidoin: "Assistant Instructor". Fukushidoin must be ranked shodan or
above. They are qualified to assist in the instruction of Aikido programs and
may be recognized to lead such programs with the approval of Sato Sensei.
27
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Jyoshu: "Assistant". Jyoshu must be ranked 2nd kyu or above. They are
qualified to assist a qualified instructor in daily Aikido class.

Dojo Etiquette
Proper observance of etiquette is as much a part of your training as is learning
techniques. Please take the following guidelines seriously.
1. When entering or leaving the dojo, it is proper to bow in the direction of
O Sensei's picture, the kamiza, or the front of the dojo. You should also
bow when entering or leaving the mat.
2. No shoes on the mat.
3. Be on time for class. If you do happen to arrive late, sit quietly in seiza on
the edge of the mat until the instructor grants permission to join practice.
4. If you should have to leave the mat or dojo for any reason during class,
approach the instructor and ask permission.
5. Avoid sitting on the mat with your back to the picture of O Sensei or the
kamiza. Also, do not lean against the walls or sit with your legs stretched
out. (Either sit in seiza or cross- legged.)
6. Remove watches, rings and other jewelry before practice.
7. Do not bring food, gum, or beverages with you onto the mat.
8. Please keep your finger and toenails cut short.
9. Please keep talking during class to a minimum. What conversation there
is, should be restricted to one topic -- Aikido.
10. Carry out the directives of the instructor PROMPTLY. Do not keep the rest
of the class waiting for you!
11. Do not engage in rough housing or needless contests of strength during
class.
12. Keep your training uniform clean, in good shape, and free of offensive
odors.
13. Please pay your membership dues promptly. If, for any reason, you are
unable to pay your dues on time, talk with the person in charge of dues
collection. Sometimes special rates are available for those experiencing
financial hardship.
14. Do not change your clothes on the mat.

28
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

15. Remember that you are here to learn, and not to gratify your ego. An
attitude of receptivity and humility is therefore advised.
Preserve common-sense standards of decency and respect at all times.

The practice of Aikido ultimately must become the practice of our daily lives,
moment to moment. Every moment of life involves some sort of conflict - with
others, with our environments, with our bodies, with ourselves. And yet, it is our
choice to see this conflict as something to be avoided and struggled with, or as
the creative force of change, which makes true growth and learning possible.
JAPANESE TERMS USED IN AIKIDO
This is an informal guide. Please be aware that many of these words express
subtle ideas not fully contained in these English translations. Included here are
primarily technical terms; words having profound philosophical meaning are
not dealt with extensively.
Ai - meeting, joining, harmony
Aikido - the way of being one with energy
Ai hanmi - mutually agreeing stance (both uke and nage lead with same foot
Aikidoka - person who practices Aikido Aikitaiso -mind-body coordination
exercises Atemi - strikes, used as a part of Aikido technique Awase - meeting
or coming together
Ayumi ashi - normal stepping, as in walking
Bo - wooden staff, usually 72"
Bokken - wooden sword
Bokken dori - sword-taking technique; also called tachitori
Bokuto - wooden sword
Bu - martial
Budo - martial way
Budoka - a practitioner of budo
Bushi - warrior class
Bushido - way of the warrior
Butsudan - "Buddha shelf-," a Buddhist shrine, often placed at the front of a
dojo influenced by Buddhist tradition
Cho - chief or head, as in dojo-cho
Chudan - middle position
Dame - incorrect, bad
Dan - black belt ranks
Do - way or path, same word as the Chinese Too
29
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Dogi - training uniform
Dojo - place of enlightenment; training hall
Doshu - master of the way; currently Moriteru Ueshiba
Eri - collar
Fudo - immovable; e.g. fudoshin, immovable mind; fudo no shisei, immovable
posture
Gaeshi - reversal
Ganmenuchi - thrust to the face
Gedan - low position
Gi - training uniform
Giri - oblioation to another
Gokyo - fifth teaching; an elbow-locking technique
Gyaku - reverse or opposite
Gyaku hanmi - mutually opposite stance (nage and uke lead with different feet)
Hakama - divided skirt
Hanmi - half-body stance
Hantachi - half-standing (kneeling position)
Hanmi hantachi waza - techniques performed by a kneeling nage against
standing uke
Hantai - opposite or reverse
Hara - the lower abdomen; the seat of correct breathing and of internal power
Hasso - a stance with the bokken or jo held to one side of the head, extending
up from the shoulder
Heiho - strategy, martial science
Henka waza - "changing technique;" changing from one technique to another
Hidari - left
Hiji - elbow
Hitai - forehead
Hito e mi - one layer of the body; a description of distance relative to an
opponent
Hiza - knee
Ho - method
Hoho - cheek
Hombu - headquarters
Ii - good
Iie - no
Ikkyo - first teaching; an arm-controlling technique
Irimi - entering
Iriminage - entering throw
Isshin den shin - from mind to mind; the way in which knowledge is said to be
transmitted from teacher to pupil
Jiyu - free (as in free technique)
30
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Jo - short wooden staff (usually 50")
Jodan - upper position
Jo dori - jo-taking technique
Jo nage - throwing with the jo
Joseki - upper (senior) side of mat area; facing shomen, joseki is the right side
Joza - upper seat, where the instructor sits
Jiujinage - crossed-arms throw; literally "number ten" throw, referencing the
cruciform shape of that character in Chinese writing
Kaeshi waza - counter technique; applying a technique against the person
attempting to apply one to you.
Kaiso - founder
Kaitenage - rotary throw
Kakari geiko - group practice
Kamae - stance or position
Kami - deity, spirit, divine being; a Shinto term
Kamiza - "god seat;" shrine or front of the dojo, if Shinto-influenced
Kan - house or hall; also Romanized this way is a different word meaning
intuition
Kata - shoulder; also, a different word meaning a form used in training; e.g.
bokken kata
Katatori - grasping the shoulder or lapel
Katate - forearm area
Katate ryotetori - one wrist grasped by both hands
Katame waza - pinning technique
Katana - a type of long sword, worm edge upwards
Ken - sword
Kenshusei - "student who strives for mastery through polishing;" in the
Association, students committed to a more intense study of Aikido
Ki - spirit, vital force, energy
Kiai - explosive projection of energy in the form of a shout or yell; also refers
to the general energy level of a person or thing
Kihon - basic technique
Ki musubi - linking one's energy with that of the opponent
Kiri - cut
Kirigaeshi - a suburi exercise of continuous yokomen and gyaku yokomen
strikes
Kohai -junior
Kotai - movement to the rear
Kote - forearm or wrist
Kotegaeshi - "wrist-turning;" a throwing technique
Kokyu - animating breath; also used to imply timing
Kokyudosa - breath or timing exercise
31

 ­

Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Koshi - hip
Koshinage - hip throw
Kuden - oral instruction
Kubi - neck
Kubishime - choking the neck
Kumitachi - sword against sword
Kumijo - jo against jo
Kyu - ranks below dan grade
Ma-ai - distance
Mae - front or forward
Meiso ho - meditation exercise
Men - head
Migi - right
Misogi - purification practices; often refers specifically to a breathing
technique
Morote tori - see Katate ryotetori
Mane - chest
Mane tsuki - thrust to the chest
Mushin - "no-mind;" a state of mind free from obstruction or attachment to
thoughts or happenings
Nage - throw; also, the person executing the throw
Nikyo - second teaching
No - an article indicating possession or connection; e_g. chudan no kamae:
"stance of middle position"
Ni - a directional indicator; e.g. shomen ni rei: "bow to the front"
Obi - belt
Omote - front
Orenaite - unbendable arm
Osae - pin; e.g. ude osae: arm pin
O'Sensei - "venerable teacher;" refers in Aikido to Morihei Ueshiba
Oyo waza - advanced or applied technique
Randori - multiple person attack (lit. "seizing chaos")
Rei - bow
Ritsurei - standing bow
Ryote - both hands
Ryotetori - grasping both hands
San - suffix, expression of respect
Sankakutai - triangular stance
Sankyo - third teaching
Sayu - side
Seika no itten - the "one point;" see tanden
Seiza - formal kneeling position
32
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Sempai - senior
Sensei - instructor (lit. "born before")
Shikko - walking on the knees
Shihan - teacher of teachers
Shihonage - four corner throw
Shime - choking or strangling
Shimoza - lower seat; place where students sit; the wall opposite from kamiza
or shomen
Shimoseki - junior area of mat; facing shomen, the left side
Shinken - a live, steel sword; figuratively, implies seriousness and
commitment
Shinken shobu - a fight to the death; figuratively, implies a situation requiring
total abandon and concentration. The spirit of good practice should be
shinken shobu.
Shinto - the native Japanese religion
Shisei - posture, body alignment
Shomen - front; the wall towards which students bow
Shomenuchi - overhead strike to the font of the head
Shugyo - intense physical/ internal training to perfect character and realize
one's true nature
Shuto - cutting strike with the edge of the hand
Sokumen iriminage - side of the head entering throw
Suburi - "empty swing;" individual striking practice with a weapon
Suburito - a heavy bokken used for suburi, and sometimes for kumitachi
Sumi otoshi - corner drop, a throwing technique
Suki - opening or weakness, mental or physical, in an opponent's defenses
Suriashi - sliding foot
Suwari waza - technique with both uke and nage in kneeling position
Tachi - a type of long sword; technically refers to swords worn edge
downward
Tachitori - see Bokken dori
Taijutsu - unarmed body arts
Tai sabski - body movement; e.g. irimi, tenkan
Tanden - (Chinese: tan tien); the "one point," the center of the body's gravity
and source of spiritual power, located two inches below the navel in the center
of the hara
Tanto - knife
Tanto dori - knife-taking techniques
Tatami - mat
Tegatana - "hand sword;" the manner in which the arm and hands are used in
Aikido to move and strike
Tekubi - wrist (lit. "throat of the hand")
33
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

Tekubitori - wrist grab
Tenkan - "spinning change;" a turning body movement
Tenchinage - "heaven-and-earth throw"
To - sword; also, the article "and"
Tori - to grab o r seize; also, the nage or defender
Toshu - without a weapon
Tsuba - sword hilt
Tsuki - thrusting attack, with fist or weapon
Uchi - strike
Uchideshi - "inner disciple;" students living in a dojo and committed to fulltime training, 24 hours a day
Ude - arm
Ude garami - arm-entwining technique
Uke - one who is thrown (lit. "One who receives")
Ukemi - "receiving body;" the art of falling and receiving techniques without
injury
Undo - exercise
Ura - behind
Ushiro - from behind or rear
Ushirotori - any rear attack; often refers specifically to bearhug. Other rear
attacks include ushiroeridori, ushirotekubitori, ushirokubishime, ushirohijitori,
ushirokatatori, etc.
Waza - technique
Yame - stop (a command)
Yoko - side
Yokomenuchi - a strike to the side of the head or temple
Yonkyo - fourth teaching
Yubi - fingers
Zanshin - "remaining mind;" a continued extension of concentration, energy
and awareness at the conclusion of a technique and immediately afterward; the
"follow through" of the technique
Zen - (Sanskrit: "Dhyana"; Chinese "Ch'an"); literally "meditation;" a school of
Buddhism emphasizing personal, intuitive experience of reality, and having a
strong influence on Japanese thought and the martial arts
Zori - sandals

34
Genshinkan Aikido, 2022

